hey this video is going to talk a little
bit about economic theory and economic
reality toward the end of the year 2015
I'm responding to some statements made
by a particular influential charlatan
here in Canada a guy who makes his
living talking about politics philosophy
and economic theory here on YouTube I
feel like I should give the guy some
credit because it's a miracle that in a
country with as little intellectual
activity as Canada that anyone can earn
their living talking about politics
economics and philosophy so in that
sense I'm happy for him and I'm happy
for everyone gets engaged in these kind
of debates and he's sincerely interested
in and concerned with these fundamental
questions on the other hand I'm now
going to proceed to disagree with just
about everything this guy says this
first chart I'm going to throw up which
as you can see is a very simple screen
capture from his recent video he
presents I'm going to look at just two
of his charts here he presents this as
self-evident proof not only that the
American economy is in a terrible crisis
but that there will be no economic
recovery when I saw this the first time
this was playing and I was doing some
housework you know pay attention of the
things I was hearing him giving this
over-the-top narration about what this
was supposedly proving or indicating it
looked at the chart and i really laughed
out loud because the chart shows the
exact opposite this chart does not prove
his point the bright yellow line on this
chart there is the Dow Jones Industrial
Average so the argument he's presenting
the what he's inviting you to believe or
imagine is that there has been no
economic recovery since the crisis in
2008 and that there will be in the
future no economic recovery that's what
he's claiming and this chart shows the
exact opposite here's a different chart
of the same thing this is the Dow Jones
Industrial Average it's just a little
bit easier to read this one but this is
the same thing that we just saw before
as a bright yellow line the dow jones
industrial average is an
index so this is not measured in
percentage points and it's not measured
in dollars it's just measured in a unit
of the index not worth explaining what
that unit is for these brief discussion
however back in January of 2009 I can
see looking at the chart here that it
dipped down to seven thousand units okay
moving forward to februari of 2013 it
had more than doubled and it continued
to increase above fourteen thousand
units so to me it's completely surreal
that somebody giving a public lecture
would present this as unquestionable
evidence of an economic collapse from
which there has been no recovery and
will be no recovery when this shows the
exact opposite this shows an economic
recovery now the Dow Jones Industrial
Average does not tell you everything
about a society it is one useful
statistic and one reason why people are
interested in the statistic is that it
does correlate to employment and
unemployment pretty strongly when the
Dow Jones Industrial Average is doing
well that's normally a positive
indication for people's chances of
getting a job and keeping a job over the
longer term but this is a positive
indicator this completely disproves the
guy's theory it hit a low and it
recovered from that low and then
continued to grow after that fact so
let's be skeptical here though maybe my
bete noire who I'm disagreeing with
maybe he's still right maybe there has
been no economic recovery well what are
we looking at here this is the
unemployment rate in the United States
it's not perfect it's not ideal we don't
live in an ideal world but as you can
see there over time there was an
economic recovery unemployment went from
ten percent down to less than six
percent in a fairly steady progression
and what happened to bring about this
change well a couple things happen of
course just lately the price
gasoline has gotten much cheaper but
what policymakers and policy anos would
indicate as being the the crucial
decisions made by the United States was
on the one hand embracing the
quantitative easing program we preferred
with qe1 qe2 qe3 and also embracing low
interest rates now this guy am I'm
disagreeing with this guy in criticizing
here he presents this chart of American
interest rates this is a benchmark rate
one of several you could use to indicate
how the US government is setting rates
he again presents this as a self-evident
sign of an economic collapse that is
ongoing and from which there will be no
recovery he does this simply through the
use of poetic imagery which you know
he's entitled to I'm not knocking his
use of the English language he vividly
describes this as being equivalent to a
pulse monitor in a hospital of someone's
heart beat tapering out because toward
the the right hand side in the last few
years since 2009 it is flatlining well
yes if this were a human heartbeat that
would be a negative indicator that would
indicate that you're dead and he goes on
a great lengths to indicate to interpret
this as supposedly showing that the
American economy is dead and there will
be no recovery however that metaphor is
completely meaningless and completely
misleading interest rates do not
resemble a human heartbeat in any way
there's no meaningful comparison there
whatsoever when interest rates are low
it means that you can get a bank loan
more cheaply now in reality it doesn't
really affect ordinary people in the
same way that it affects large
corporations a large company that is
looking to open a gold mine in Canada
now really has an incentive to take on
the debt and open that gold mine while
interest rates are low a big project
like that opening a new factory
investing a lot of money for the long
term when companies get deeply into that
those are the types of
that are really impacted by this type of
near-zero interest rate so you know I
think it's really worthwhile for
everyone no matter where you are on the
political spectrum to challenge yourself
to give a lucid account not just of your
factual claims but of the values that
are lurking behind them so in this case
it's just presented to us as if it were
self-evidently terrible for interest
rates to be low well why is that why
would you think that's a bad thing now I
i have my own biases and my own values
there is a sense in which i'm sort of
prejudiced against this style of
economic intervention i I'm not a fan of
the quantitative easing program that the
United States elected to embark on I'm
not a fan of what its outcomes were in
Japan or the United States or in Europe
were similar imitative economic
interventions to place I have my own
critiques and my own biases and I can
discuss those in an open and responsible
way however I'm not going to lie to you
and say that because I'm biased against
it it doesn't get results the United
States cut interest rates to near zero
and in many ways it got the results that
the US government was hoping for showed
that gradual decline in unemployment I
may not like it I may have reasons why I
might think some other economic policy
would be even more effective or more
ethical or would lead to greater social
justice there is a real question of
justice you know a question of
responsibility and the part of bankers
and you know people who are guilty of
financial malfeasance in 2008 crisis
those are all important questions
they're not what we're addressing here
this chart of interest rates being in
near zero doesn't give us any of those
questions may be worth talking about but
getting at the kind of ethic
underpinnings of our ideas about
economics is tremendous important as you
see in some ways the fashions in
economics are comparable to religious
beliefs beliefs in different religions
come and go with time and people do
fanatically and fundamentally believe in
economic assumptions one of the great
beliefs in our time and for the people
who are now older than 60 years old the
type of people who are prime ministers
presidents bureaucrats technocrats
almost all of those people who are in
powerful decision-making positions in
the government and in the banking sector
these are all people over 60 years old
if you're 55 and you're in a senior
position like that the press remarks
that you're young a young and upcoming
politician age 52 so you know this is a
world of gray haired people for that
generation in power right now they
really are the generation that lost
their faith in Keynesian economics and
the theories of John Maynard Keynes and
that among other things really their new
faith what's often called monetarism
it's also called the efficient markets
hypothesis these are different these are
not those are not two different names
the same thing so different ideas that
became popular the assumptions of
neoliberalism these are people who
almost like an article of religious
faith believe that low interest rates
will help unemployment so it will
increase employment will increase
economic activity and will get people
good jobs so in some ways yes that is
like a religious belief if you really
talk to government bureaucrats and
you've elected officials boy you can
sometimes feel the intensity of that
being equivalent to religious belief but
it's also fundamentally different from
any religious idea in the following
crucially important way in general
economic theories that people may
believe to be
under all circumstances to be true
globally and universally in general
they're true under some circumstances
and not under other circumstances that's
totally different from anything in the
world of religion that's totally
different from anything in normal sort
of democratic political discourse like
you know someone who is Catholic who
believes that abortion is evil they
believe that's true under all
circumstances but this type of economic
belief one of the reasons why it can be
so powerful is that there will be
examples where the economic theory works
and neoliberalism in terms of a playbook
in terms of a an instruction manual for
what to do with the economy in some
circumstances it has had very positive
results and in some it has been a total
failure people like Christine Lagarde
current head of the International
Monetary Fund different leaders of
institutions Europe I think they tend to
ignore the negative examples and to
focus on the positive examples we'll
come back to that in just a moment okay
one positive example that's sort of
close to my own heart whether I love it
or hate it something that's been a big
part of my life is the island of Taiwan
so this methodology of chopping interest
rates engaging in quantitative easing
and other manner other methods to
maintain liquidity maintain the status
quo with Bank players etc okay its
associated primarily with Japan in some
ways japanese-style economic policies it
actually been more effective in Taiwan
than they have been in Japan look at
this shirt how did Taiwan respond to the
economic crisis in 2008 well there you
go they chopped interest rates down to
near zero okay so what was the outcome
of this economic policy in Taiwan there
you go there was a crisis unemployment
shut up to six percent not very high by
Canadian standards but very high by
Taiwanese standards they chopped
interest
and they had this recovery okay and as
their economic situation improved they
restored interest rates not all the way
but they interested back up from a very
low rate to a more moderate or
reasonable rate okay so this is the
neoliberal ideal okay taiwan's economy
performed exactly the way a certain kind
of monetarist neoliberal economic
playbook would like the whole world to
behave right unfortunately or
fortunately the whole world doesn't pay
that way now I'm not saying this is
someone who loves Taiwan unconditionally
I know the reasons why Taiwan has this
type of economic strength and can bounce
back that way the island of Taiwan is
very different from the island of
Ireland and it's very different from the
economy in a place like Canada Taiwan is
a miserable place to live for some
obvious reasons you can't drink the
water you can't breathe the air a pretty
fundamental life on Earth the intensity
of industrialization in Taiwan is
horrific to behold it's awful you live
on the south west coast where they have
the shipping industry the steel industry
a plastics manufacturing electronics
manufacturing computer exports well that
gives Taiwan a lot of economic
resiliency in the post-2008 and
recovering from this economic crash it
also means you can't breathe the air you
can't treat the water there are a lot of
other social problems that come out of
that they're dependent on importing
cheap labor from Indonesia and the
Philippines numerous social problems I
could mention that are related even to
the strengths of their factory system
however on this chart looks pretty good
and in terms of the people who are over
60 years of age who are sitting in power
around the world they look at that and
they think me too if you're the prime
minister of Spain or France or Greece
you look at this chart and think wow I
wish I had
unemployment under four percent probably
the Prime Minister of Canada looks at
this stuff and thinks wow I wish I had
unemployment under four percent and they
don't really think about the
underpinning variables the deep
institutional economic social
assumptions for why this concave this
way all right so here's Japan Japan this
is a ten-year chart by the way this is
not a short period of time being shown
here Japan has had interest rates at
zero for an absurdly long period of time
again I want to come back to the basic
premise presented by my bete noire here
my great Canadian theoretician who I'm
disagreeing with if interest rates were
in any way comfortable to a human
heartbeat then Japan would be dead and
it's been dead for many many years right
that's that's the ridiculous theory that
this is a sign of an economic crisis
with no recovery and not only no
recovery past tense that there will be
no recovery for in the future tense this
period of time here looking at like 2008
2015 a few extra years in there I got to
keep a real few I've lived in Cambodia
if you were living in Cambodia during
this period of time and you went to
visit Japan let's say you lived there
for a year you would think Japan was
paradise on earth you would think wow
what an amazing society what an amazing
economy in every way the education
system the drinking water public
transportation from head to toe Japan
would be and a very impressive society
to you imagine if you went from athens
in greece same scenario and you visited
japan during this period of time do you
think you would regard japanese society
as a disaster I mean these are real
questions if having interest rates near
zero is a disaster then Japan as an
example should affirm the supposes now
there are serious social problems
I'm not an uncritical fan of japan i'm
not going to digress for each of these
examples and all the things i dislike
about the country but I am NOT sitting
here as someone who's biased in favor of
Japan I'm not someone who's presenting
Japan as a positive example for
countries like Canada and Ireland to
imitate or emulate one of the reasons
for that is that I don't think Canada
can I don't think it's possible for
Canada to reproduce the same positive
outcomes that Japan gets from these
policies and there are a lot of factors
there some of them like the ones I
mentioned just now for Taiwan having a
massively industrial export-led economy
export-oriented economy what we like to
say canada doesn't have that Canada this
is from memory but in last 15 years near
2000 year 2015 the percentage of our gdp
that's occupied by manufacturing
declined from eighteen percent to only
ten percent we already were well into
deindustrialization back in the year
2000 taking in the 1990s not a period of
rapid expansion of manufacturing Canada
so these same theories same playbook of
how to handle 2008 financial crisis it
won't have the same outcomes for country
like Canada as it will for Japan and
we're about to see it doesn't even have
the same o comes for Japan as it does
have for Taiwan ok and addie
industrializing country that maybe only
exports raw materials like Canada not
exporting finish manufactured products
in our case dependent on oil exports
gold exports diamond exports but you
know in Canada we drive a lot of
Japanese cars in Japan they don't drive
a lot of canadian car's we're not
exporting a whole lot of cars from
canada to japan's the other way around
capisce um
these are the factors well look I mean
the others are you know labor mobility
is so many factors to get into here that
these abstractions don't really show you
but hey what's the outcome for Japan if
you think near-zero interest rates are
such a bad thing what if you were
sitting right now in madrid you were
wringing your hands over the economic
crisis in spain an economic planners say
to you do what Japan did look at your
pan they recovered from the crisis they
brought unemployment from five point
five percent down to below three and a
half percent spectacular okay what's the
point in saying there is no economic
recovery there will be no economic rub
in many of these countries there has
been there already has been economic
recovery so back when the u.s. made the
decision to basically imitate Japan I
was laughing I thought it was hilarious
because the Americans have been snubbing
the Japanese for decades about
macroeconomic policy in Japan and then
as soon as America has a crisis they're
trying to imitate the Japanese a quant
qe1 quantitative easing phase one did
have some significant differences from
Japanese the Japanese equivalent to
quantitative easing QE 2 + QE 3 they're
even even closer Japanese in America
reproducing this Japanese strategy
quantitative easing + dropping interest
rates to zero but again you look at that
chart for Japan you think hey this is a
country that injured this type of
economic problem while maintaining very
low rates of unemployment a lot of
people take that bargain okay canada
already talked about it a bit same basic
strategy not quite as rapid to drop to
zero interest rates but in response to
the 2008 crisis interest rates come down
to near zero and then come back up again
a little bit yep
there's Canada's unemployment rate has
there been an economic recovery yes it's
a mediocre economic recovery in Canada's
case okay Canada has not recovered I
would say as well as the United States
but on the other hand within my lifetime
six percent unemployment seven percent
unemployment that's about as good as it
gets in Canada we have a lot of
different factors to blame for that
including the decline of manufacturing
as already mentioned the decline of a
lot of things in this country but that
includes also are somewhat ridiculous
labor policies we are we have a
government here that wants to keep the
cost of labor low by importing cheap
labor from Latin America Asia all around
the world at all times so that maintains
a high rate of unemployment and
relatively low wages creates a lot of
dynamic inequalities in society that's
also part of the sort of playbook of
neoliberalism has it worked out for
Canada in some ways yes in some ways no
I would say the results here have been
mediocre but as you're about to see not
as bad as say Ireland right so for all
of Europe they now have a European
Central Bank and European Central Bank
again same basic playbook let's do what
Japan did but you could see actually
back in 2009-2010 the european central
bankers were actually a bit more um
skeptical about jumping into the latest
japanese fashion so it's not until 2014
that this benchmark interest rate really
gets down to zero uh maybe it's only
then they they recognize how desperate
the situation is or that they're
convinced to try to imitate something
japan has done such a long time ago
unemployment in greece twenty-five
percent
okay you want to talk about a situation
where there has been no recovery there
is no recovery there is no future does
not describe the situation the United
States at all the United States has had
a recovery and that's obvious in the Dow
Jones Industrial Average obvious in the
unemployment rate there has been a very
real economic recovery the United States
not in Greece okay the Greek economy
doesn't have any of the strengths of the
Japanese economy doesn't have any the
strengths the Taiwanese economy and it
also doesn't have any of the strengths
of the Canadian economy all right here
in canada we can still just dig up gold
dig up oil dig up a lot of natural
resources and sell them we're still
cutting down trees believe it or not um
we are we're balancing our books to a
large extent as we always have done
since our colonial period through
resource extraction now would I rather
live in Greece or Taiwan a lot of people
go on vacation in Greece for a reason
for many reasons cultural heritage
reasons as well as the natural beauty of
the place and so on if you've been to
any of the big cities in the west coast
of Taiwan any of those great centers of
industrial production they're pretty
much hell on earth my impression from
afar is that the towns along the coasts
and harbors of Greece relatively
Pleasant and beautiful places yeah olive
trees and all that um so yeah Greece has
some advantages anyone who's on the far
left anyone who's a sincere communist
sympathizer socialist far leftist you
tell me when you're above twenty-five
percent unemployment why don't you have
a revolution a lot of talk out of the
left if you were actually sitting and
waiting for capitalism to break down so
you could rise up in revolution as per
Karl Marx's original three if you
actually believe that theory then this
would be it folks and if you want to
know why the rate is dropping
greece has a declining population one of
the reasons why unemployment goes down
is that people give up looking for a job
and move to another country and the
Greeks do have labour mobility they can
pack up and move to Berlin they can look
for work elsewhere okay of course when
you have a long-term economic crisis
like this you also get fewer people
being born women choose to not have
babies or delay having babies because
same thing that happens in a civil war
you get real demographic impacts ok this
is the chart for Cyprus the island of
cuprous another country have had some
interest in over the years the numbers
are not as astronomical we're here
looking at about sixteen percent
unemployment but again in real terms
there is no recovery ok so this in this
case pessimism is appropriate and in
Cyprus I think everyone who could leave
the country already has left the country
before 2014 they have a fair bit of
mobility especially links to England
people going from Cyprus to London try
to get a job and so on but this late
date probably everyone who can leave
already has left ok my heart breaks for
Cyprus terrible situation not getting
any better and in terms of the PlayBook
of neoliberalism I'm not talking about a
life here but this is really the type of
nitty-gritty people should get into
guess what the theory works great for
one island taiwan doesn't work for many
of these countries in europe including
snipers spain i used to live on the
border between France and Spain down in
French Catalonia we had the refugees
from this economic crisis coming across
the border and a lot of the local jobs
were being held by Spanish citizens were
you know generally Catalan rushing
across the border to get any job they
could fixing up the streets and what
have you and plenty them were miserable
and we're vowing they would
going to Germany because they hated
France so much well everyone's a critic
look this is a real crisis against pain
you know population decline you have
unemployment decreasing partly just
because people are leaving the country
entirely people are no longer having as
many babies etc so this is a profound
crisis with no recovery in sight ok but
not the United States hot those charts
were looking at earlier right finally it
is tragicomic to me is both tragic and
hilarious that christine lagarde has
held up ireland as a positive example of
the theory working of the in this is a
much more elaborate theory of government
austerity combined with a checklist of
neoliberal policies ireland has had some
decline in its unemployment but i don't
want to go on for ever hear anyone who's
taking any time to look at the social
political economic reality of what's
been happening ireland last few years
you tell me if there's any cause for
optimism ultimately christine lagarde
holding up ireland as a positive example
is totally self-defeating because even
if she were correct even if my cynicism
were misplaced here and ireland really
were a tremendous a positive example of
an economy that has bounced back guess
what the population of ireland is less
than the population of a medium-sized
city in china more people live in see
amin china then live in the whole
country of Ireland so even if you know
the policy works on one that Ireland has
bounced back a little bit with
unemployment only at ten percent now
she'll be delighted to have ten percent
unemployment right it's a moot point all
right I can't believe how long it took
me to make what's such a fundamentally
simple point here
look I mean from my generation I'm old
enough to remember the world as it was
before 1989 and I'm young enough to have
really been sensitive to the shock waves
of fad economic theories that spread
around the world primarily through the
internet around the time of the Occupy
Wall Street movement okay the ridiculous
theories about let's get back to the
gold standard and demonizing central
banking in general and you know this
weird mix of libertarianism and
incoherent social Marxist critiques of
neoliberalism Occupy Wall Street for me
was really kind of a crossroads of you
know bad ideas about economics that
nevertheless you know captured public
sympathy because of the social context
of real fear and apprehension about the
outcomes of still ongoing economic and
financial crisis economic theories are
different from religious beliefs in that
even the worst economic theory is going
to be true under some circumstances and
the theories that currently rule the
world I personally partly because of a
difference in values I'm biased against
them and I disagree with them but I
recognize that those theories are true
and valid and effective under some
circumstances the fellow have chosen to
frame this video as a disagreement with
he doesn't really explain what his
problem is with low interest rates but
even if you really feel that having
near-zero interest rates is a problem
ethically or economically you still have
to be willing to recognize that in some
circumstances that theory
get the desired effects look we had a
whole generation of people who believe
that everything John Maynard Keynes
taught was wrong was discredited and of
course they followed right after a
generation of economists and politicians
and social leaders who thought that
everything John Maynard Keynes taught
was right now Keynes was one person he
was one economist there's a whole
category of social policies and economic
theories that we call kings Ian under
the influence of Keynes anyone with a
detached attitude looking at the same
evidence or just say well Keynes was
right about some things and he was wrong
about some things and he set down
economic policies some of which are true
and effective and useful under some
circumstances and others not so much but
people do tend to believe in these
things with a kind of religious fervor
and they also tend to be disillusioned
with them in the same way that a
religious believer loses their faith so
yeah we got to see the roller coaster of
Keynes Ian economics and now in the
aftermath 2000 a crisis I guess we're
seeing a similar sort of disillusionment
with some of the fundamental assumptions
of neoliberalism I am very far from
being a fan of Japanese economics but
when you think about it logically
perhaps the first country where we will
really see a next step beyond
neoliberalism might be Japan precisely
because Japan was the first country to
adopt what's now international
phenomenon of quantitative easing etc
the sort of late neoliberal playbook for
bailing out your economy so it would
make sense if Japan now
under the leadership of a [ __ ] Enzo
might become the first country to turn
that next corner and start really
thinking critically about what aspects
of neoliberalism has to be reconsidered
what aspects jettisoned
you